# GNU Fortran Universal Build

This directory contains the scripts used to build a fully universal
GNU Fortran for macOS. The scripts will build for the `/opt/gfortran`
destination with macOS 11 target and SDK. (Most scripts have a single
`prefix` parameter, but some don't). The build requires macOS 11
or higher and Apple silicon machine with Rosetta 2 installed.

The scripts are described in the order they should be run.

* `deps.sh` - downloads and builds GCC dependencies.
  They are built statically, so they do not need to be distributed
  with the compiler. They will be installed in the `deps`
  subdirectory.
  Note: for Rosetta 2 safety `gmp` is built with `westmere` target to
  avoid illegal instruction faults in Rosetta due to AVX.

* `build.sh` - builds GCC + GNU Fortran for all four combinations.
  
  The first step is to build stubs for all system tools,
  because cross-compilation requires `<arch>-<build>-<tool>` even
  though all tools are universal, so the stubs simply execute
  `/usr/bin/<tool>` instead (see the `stubs` directory).
  
  Then the native arm64 and x86_64 compilers are built (for simplicity
  we treat x86_64 as native) then the corresponding cross-compilers
  targetting the other architecture. The resulting directories have
  this structure:
  
  * `obj-<host_arch>-<target_arch>` location of the GCC build
  * `dst-<host_arch>-<target_arch>` location of the installation
  
  After each successful build the result is installed in the prefix
  location, becuase the cross-compiler build uses GCC built in the
  native step from the installed location.
  
  Note: all `@rpath`s are removed and replaced with target locations,
  because run-time libraries are notoriously fragile when using
  `@rpath` (works for the compilers, but not the run-time).
  
  `UPDATE=1` env var can be set in repeated calls to `build.sh` to
  avoid re-building already built `dst-*-*` directories.

* `mkuniversal.sh` - uses the `dst-*-*` directories to create a final
  `dst-universal` directory. It is based on the cross-compiled
  builds (because the native builds include `g++` which is not
  necessary and opens a whole can of worms we don't want). Then all
  binaries for the same target are `lipo`ed from both architectures -
  both the drivers in `bin` and `libexec`. Then the simple `gfortran`
  driver-driver is built (from `stubs`).

This process is more or less based on Apple's old `gcc` and the way we
created universal GNU Fortran back then for PowerPC and Intel, which
was conceptually built this way. Unfortunately, the original
`driverdriver.c` can no longer be used, because the GCC driver API has
changed dramatically in 2010 so we provide a very rudimentary
driver-driver which only filters duplicate `-arch` flags and raises an
error if different archs are used.

An alternative `gfortran-multiarch` is provided to support multi-arch
compilation in one call via `-arch arm64 -arch x86_64`, but that is not
well-tested and instead of linking a full GCC driver, it relies on a
hack where the GCC driver will list output files into a file specified
by `_GCC_WRITE_OUTFILES` which are then `lipo`ed together.

Note: all builds use `--enable-version-specific-runtime-libs` to
ensure that both the native compilers and the cross-compilers use the
same run-time library locations. Technically, we could `lipo` both
`lib` locations into one (which is what we did when we used the native
prefix location), but the rationale is that not using the native
location is safer.

Simon Urbanek <simon.urbanek@R-project.org>

Created on February 2023 for gcc-12-branch (GNU Fortran 12.2)
updated January 2025 for gcc-14-2 (GNU Fortran 14.2)
